.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2023 by Ricardo Yanez <ricardo.yanez@calel.org>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH RANGE 1 2023-02-05
.\" NAME should be all caps, SECTION should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parms are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.SH NAME
range \- program to calculate -dE/dx and range
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B range
[\fIOPTION\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR range
program calculates -dE/dx and range of ions in absorber foils.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-n, --ns
use the Northcliffe-Schilling correlations valid for E/A < 12 MeV/A (default)
.TP
.B \-h, --hbg
use the Hubert-Bimbot-Gauvin correlations valid for 2.5 < E/A < 100 MeV/A
.TP
.B \-l, --list
show a list of pre-defined absorber compounds and exit
.TP
.B \-v, --version
show the rangelib version number and exit
.TP
.B \-\-help
display this help and exit
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR rangelib (3), passage (3), egassap (3), rangen (3), thickn (3)
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Ricardo Yanez.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <ricardo.yanez@calel.org>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2004-2023 Ricardo Yanez.
.PP
This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.
